July 23rd sitting in the nice quiet living room with both the doctor and Mrs. Anderson here at 743 South Rosemary.
Now test your mic and let's be sure it's working.
Just anything brief.
I'm very happy to be involved in this interview process.
Let's begin by asking you to reminisce about family.
Your family got to College Station when?
My father joined the athletic department at A&M in 1920, and he retired in 1957.
My mother was a native of Navasota, and they married, and mother and dad married in 1925, and her life was associated with A&M very much after that.
All right, you shared a few nights ago with us over supper a delight, to me, delightfully interesting description of your father's potential role in how the 12th man myth got to be at A&M.
Would you go back and trace him through that prep school and Mississippi College, please?
My dad was a Tennessean, having grown up in Sparta.
Following high school, he attended a prep school in Shelbyville one year.
And dad was a very good student and a very good athlete.
And his football coach was a young man named DX Bible, who was in his first year of coaching.
The prep school team did very well, winning its league.
And as a consequence of this, DX Bible received the opportunity to go to Mississippi College as the coach of the athletic program.
My dad followed him there, enrolled as a freshman.
The first football game was against the university, what is now Mississippi State University, but at that time was called Mississippi A&M.
And the Mississippi College scored two field goals, and my father scored a 90-yard touchdown.
And as a consequence of that, the Mississippi College was ahead 13 to nothing at the half.
And incidentally, this dad's touchdown was the first scored by a Mississippi College athlete against A&M.
As the third quarter wore on, Mississippi College got to the point that it was having problems sending in replacements for injured athletes.
And during this phase, Mississippi and I got ahead 14 to 13, at which point
Mississippi College ran out of players.
They could only field 10 people.
And the two teams on the field, without consulting the coaches on the sidelines, decided to call the game at that point.
And I've always thought that D.X.
Bible's experience with his first college football game ending that way was probably something that made him prepared to deal with the situation if it ever occurred again.
And as I think many people know that Ed M. played in the Cotton Palace game in the early 1920s in Dallas,
And evidently there were some injuries, and young Ken Gill, a sophomore at that time,
who had not made the traveling squad for the football team, was called out of the stands as a potential replacement, I believe it, in position.
Now, King Gill incidentally became a physician and proposed me to a professional society many years later.
He also, as a freshman, was on my father's freshman football team and freshman basketball team.
Was King Gill big, small?
King Gill was a very large person.
He was tall.
I noticed there's a statue adjacent to the football field showing King Gill, but he was larger than the stature.
He was, I would say, at least six feet.
And his specialty in medicine?
His specialty was eye, ear, nose, and throat, and I think in later years he primarily practiced ophthalmology or eye.
Hometown?
Corpus Christi.
That's where he practiced.
And he, I presume, had very little reputation here as a great athlete.
I think he was more a basketball player than a football player, but I don't think he was all conference or anything of that sort.
All right.
Your dad graduated from Mississippi College.
Yes.
My dad received a bachelor's degree in 1916 from Mississippi College and the next year a master's, an MA in history from Mississippi College.
And it's interesting.
In those years, apparently the eligibility rules were somewhat different from now.
And at that time at Mississippi College, you could play varsity football four years.
And he played three years as an undergraduate student and one year as a graduate student.
And he was a very fine athlete, very quick, and a running back.
He was a running back?
Running back, yes.
Physically, what were his dimensions?
He was five feet seven inches and weighed 140 pounds playing college football.
Coach Bible was his coach all those years at Mississippi College.
Yeah, Coach Bible was Dad's coach the first three years.
The third year, he came to A&M as freshman coach.
The position my dad was brought to a few years later.
Apparently, mid-season,
That year LSU lost its football coach, and so he went over and finished the season as the LSU football coach and then came back to A&M.
And your dad comes over then in what year?
My father came in 1920.
And what were his assignments?
He was the freshman coach of football and basketball.
and assistant track coach.
The athletic department at that time had three members, the ex-bible and Claude Rothgib and my father.
Rothgib?
Yes.
R-O-T-H-G-I-B?
G-E-B, I believe.
G-E-B.
Do you remember any estimate as to what your father's beginning pay was?
I thought, his beginning pay, his beginning salary, did he ever?
I don't know.
I thought that would be an interesting number to be so small.
My father was in the World War II.
one and I think as a captain initially and then as a major and the story and his his income there I think was two hundred dollars a month but I don't know what the NM salary was but but when he was commandant many years later I think his
His total income for the year was $3,500.
This was during the recovery phase from the Depression.
So he comes in 1920, a single young man.
That's correct.
Where did he live?
The first year he lived in the YMCA, where bachelors often lived in those days.
And after that, he and Luther Jones and Tommy Mayo and Ike Ashburn and D.X.
either rented or bought a little house south of College Station close to where the lake used to be in College Park.
And they were roommates there until they had married.
All of those men were single at that point?
All were single, yes.
And all that were on the faculty or staff?
That's correct.
I'm astonished at how much talent there was in that house.
and how important those people became to this school and others.
Let's see.
Did you, you knew DX Bible.
Yes.
Describe him in personality and physical size and so forth.
He was not a large person physically.
He was about to add size.
In fact, Herschel Burgess, who was an athlete on the team, football as well as track team, mentioned many years later when DX was visiting Dad in College Station that he saw a car approaching with no one in it.
And as he got even with the car, he raised up and looked down and their dad and DX were sitting, dad driving and DX in the other seat, pointing out that they were not very tall people.
But DX Bible was actually the son of a
a Greek and Latin professor at Carson Newman College.
And he was a good speaker, somewhat reserved,
in just casual contact.
But a good speaker, my father said he should have been a Baptist minister because he could sway his team emotionally at halftime and other talks.
As the son of a
teacher of those subjects, that may explain how he got that name, Dana Zenitha.
Exactly, yes.
Okay.
And he was the head coach of everything Coach Bible was?
Yes.
Well, he was the athletic director at A&M.
And also at Mississippi College.
But at Mississippi College, the athletic director was the whole department.
Did your dad have any teaching responsibilities in those early years?
Yes.
The athletic department handled the physical education program in the 1920s until 19, well, later than that, but in 1926, W.L.
Penberthy was brought here from Ohio State to set up an independent physical education department, but the coaches still helped with a lot of the classes.
And my father actually, from 1937 until going into the military in 1942, was actually in the physical education department as a professor.
And he taught the first health education courses in that department.
But most of the coach's work was really related more toward tennis or other athletic activities that the students engaged in.
You said they lived first year in the Y. The building that you and I know today was the same building then.
That's correct.
So there was an upstairs or so, some rooms?
I don't know too many floors, but at least there is a second floor above the first.
And that floor, or if there were another one above it, was set aside far up.
rooms for people who had just come to A&M as faculty and staff people.
At that time A&M was, of course, extremely isolated.
There were just a few houses around the campus, off the campus.
And I'm assuming in 1920 he may not have had a car.
Did he have one when he got here?
Yes, I think he did, yes.
By the time I remember very much, mother and dad did have two cars, and they had a 10-year plan with their automobiles.
Mother had the cars the first five years.
Dad had the cars the second five years, which meant that they had hard-duty hunting and that sort of thing.
So that they had a rolling train.
He lived on campus, then moved off.
Did you ever hear him talk about what
those young bachelors did in their free time on a Friday or Saturday night?
What was the social life for a young professional?
You know, I don't know too much about that time after the marriage, though.
I'm more familiar, thanks to my mother's information.
Tell me about how they met and their marriage.
probably three years before they married, and they were put together in the Ike Ashburn wedding.
He married a young lady named Bula from Navasota, who was a friend of my mother.
And so mother and dad were placed together as members of the wedding group and did not immediately go together, but in time began to date.
and married in 1925.
And they lived in the Aggieland Inn the first year of their marriage.
The Aggieland Inn was the predecessor of the MSC as far as on-campus housing, our hotel-type accommodations.
Located near the North Gate, across the street from Cebisa.
That's correct, yeah.
And then, I presume the second year of their marriage, they lived in faculty housing on the block on Houston Street, on the block that the Memorial Student Center is located today.
They lived there until 1935 when Dad became Commandant and Dean of Men.
The faculty housing was arranged so that certain departments or university or college had specific houses in one area.
And so they moved in from an athletic department house to the military area house, which made a move of all of one block down Houston Street, of course.
So when your memory begins,
with living on that block?
Actually, the first block.
I remember that, yeah.
And where were you born?
I was actually born in the first house.
At that time, the college physician, Dr. Marsh, was allowed a small private practice
and he delivered me.
Speaking of the social element, that evening apparently there was a dinner party on campus in one of the houses, faculty houses, and I arrived at 6, 12, or 15, so he was able to attend dinner that evening.
And I might add that social events of that nature were very common on campus in those years.
that flag people entertained their neighbors and their friends and so forth.
Describe, as you recall, in those years, what one of those social events might have involved.
Well, first of all, people dressed for the occasion.
Men wore suits and ladies wore nice dresses.
I'm speaking of the 1930s, but the men wore just regular suits.
You know, there might be some sort of libation before dinner, and then there would be a formal dinner served at the table, and essentially everyone had maids in those years, and so the maid served, and there were several course dinner.
Was it normal for there to be wine served?
Yes, it was, very much, yeah.
There wasn't any unwritten rule about it?
No, there wasn't.
In fact, an interesting story is that during the, to me at least, that during the prohibition, of course, it was very difficult to get alcoholic beverages, and my father actually made beer.
And on one occasion, the bottles got hot and popped.
And Mrs. Summey, who lived next door, Dr. Summey was head of the English department, heard this popping.
And so she came over, knowing what had happened, of course, and started asking Daddy prying questions about what had happened.
And Dad was trying to avoid telling her, but eventually the thief came out.
And the reason she'd come over was she wanted the recipe and the equipment so they could...
They could duplicate that.
Duplicate the process.
Incidentally, Dr. Summey was a Presbyterian seminary son, at least the son of a Presbyterian seminary.
I see.
And your family were Presbyterian.
And I presume that among those
faculty families there living on the same block, there weren't many secrets.
Exactly.
So that perhaps people were aware of what was being brewed.
Who were your family's closest faculty friends in the 30s?
Probably, well, actually, the E. E. McQuillan's very close.
He was actually head of the former Students' Association, and Mother and Mrs. McQuillan, Julia McQuillan, were very good friends.
And then a younger couple who were lifelong friends were the Tom Harringtons, Tom and Ruth Harringtons, very, very close to Mother.
They had just all of their lives,
Let's concentrate on them for a few moments.
I know that he was from Plano because that family, my family from Garland, and there were many important roles that the Harrington family
played in Plano, and I use the word play meaning very, very positive.
Was she also Plano?
I think so.
I think her maiden name was Ruth Norris.
She went to Baylor, and I thought that she was from Dallas.
Okay.
Share any recollections you have of the family's relations with the Harringtons.
Well, they were just extremely good friends.
I know that when I was 11 years old, I shot my first buck.
Dad was a great hunter, so I was initiated into deer hunting at an early age.
And I recall that the evening we returned,
from the hut with the deer, the Harringtons dropped by for just a visit.
This was true of that time.
People just visited me.
It wasn't necessarily a formal thing, but they came by and I have a photo showing me holding their little boy John, who was an infant at that time, with my deer.
And John became an ophthalmologist just as I have been.
Where did you kill the deer?
Where?
It was at the Grody, G-R-O-T-E, ranch near Johnson City.
Old Dr. Walton, the president, loved to hunt too.
And Dad and he and a number of people from A&M were members of that deer lease, Dr. Marsh.
Because there was no... Mr. Hoyle and Mr. Chatham who headed the exchange store and other people.
There were no deer around here in those days.
In those years there were no deer here.
That's what I thought.
The campus routine then were classes for six days a week so that there were six work days and then
until Saturday noon and then Saturday afternoon would have been non-scheduled and Sunday.
Your family, when did the Presbyterian Church at the North Gate begin to get organized?
The Presbyterian Church in Northgate, well actually the church itself was organized in the 1920s, and it met in the chapel of the YMCA building.
I can remember going there.
Who were some of the regular members?
the D.W.
Williams were, the Boltons, the Marshes,
I'm thinking back to those earlier years at this point.
Cassians?
Cassians, yes, very much.
Of course, Mr. Cassians headed the YMCA, and the Lancasters also were very active.
Carolyn Mitchell was my Sunday school superintendent, and the Mitchells too.
And it was a group of people who had major roles in university in many cases.
So you all met on the campus for many years.
And we, incidentally, our Sunday school class was in the bottom of the assembly hall.
We were talking about the church and it being on campus and then getting organized off campus.
That's correct.
The first building that the church had was its present location, and it was an army chapel that had been
the building itself was an army chapel to which in about 1950 or 51 or two, a rather extensive educational and fellowship hall component was headed adjacent to it.
Do you remember where the chapel came from?
Which army base?
I don't know which base, no.
Now I might mention that apparently
In the early 1940s, the YMCA chapel was not available, and so for a few years, the church met in the Campus Theater, which was a rather large auditorium, you might call it, with a large seating capacity.
Is it Gallium?
No, this was the campus theater.
Oh, the campus.
Oh, oh, oh, I'm sorry.
The campus theater at the North Gate, yes.
At the North Gate, yes.
And which is intended to dwarf our congregation.
The army chapel was more appropriate in size.
All right.
There were Sunday school classes.
Yes.
And Sunday morning, preaching?
The Sunday school classes, incidentally, going back to my earliest memories on campus, the first Sunday school classes were held in the basement area at the back of the Guyon Hall.
And I thought this was simply a Presbyterian group, but it was apparently
a unified or composite Sunday school class, and then the first Presbyterian Sunday school classes then apparently were held or evidently held in the basement of the assembly hall, which was a wood structure where the chapel now stands.
You mentioned Caroline Mitchell, who recently died.
Describe her as a young woman.
Caroline was a person with an interesting sense of humor, I always thought, and a positive person.
She had had, I guess you'd say, a number of early tragedies.
engaged, as I recall, to a young man who was killed in military service, possibly in an airplane crash.
And then, apparently, essentially the same thing happened again.
And so she had two engagements, but was never married.
And her father was a professor of mathematics, as I recall, at least on the faculty.
She taught high school during part of the early 1940s at Consolidated and then for many years was a staff member in the registrar's office.
Now, I remember her in that role as a very strong-willed woman.
Yes.
that her answer was very definitely yes or very definitely no, and there was not much chance of changing her mind.
Yes, and I think her sense of humor sometimes took sort of devious turns.
My dad said that when dealing with some of his athletes' academic records that she was very much a stickler for things being exactly so.
Back to the church.
Who was the, when the congregation was meeting on campus, who was the minister?
Well, Norman Anderson was the minister throughout my memory.
There was someone before him.
sort of in the timeframe of about 1925.
And Norman Anderson was there by the time I was baptized in 1930.
I was born in 1928.
And incidentally, I received a little New Testament.
I was given one at that time, a very small one, and it said something about becoming a fisher of men.
And I took that with me when I went to Zaire and worked in a Presbyterian hospital.
How good.
Were you given that at baptism time?
I was given one like that when I finished my primary.
I was.
Two years old, plus or minus.
Were there any other congregations that met on campus?
Not to my knowledge.
My earliest recollection is that the Baptists and the Methodists and the Church of Christ people had their separate
Sanctuaries North, in College State North.
Already at Northgate.
Catholic also?
And Catholic also.
In fact, that probably was the oldest of the ones, yeah.
Let's now talk about being a little boy on the campus.
You start the first grade what year, where?
I started the first grade
I guess in 1935, in a building called the Music Hall, which was three blocks from our house.
It was so interesting that I was born one block from where I received my college diploma and three blocks from where I attended the first grade.
But Mrs. Simons was my teacher, and she later was my patient when I entered practice here.
Simon?
Simons, S-A-M-M-O-N-S.
Her husband died, and she later became Mrs. Robert Lyle.
Very pleasant, nice person.
How many in that first grade?
Hmm?
There probably were about 22 or three of us.
And incidentally, nearly all of us were together when we graduated from high school.
It was an environment where there was not a lot of change of people at the faculty and staff level.
Everyone stayed for their careers.
And these were almost all campus youngsters?
Yes.
Was it?
Probably three-fourths were campus youngsters and maybe six or seven from out of town.
Was it already named A&M Consolidated School?
Yes, it was.
It may have had a different name when it started, but the reason it was called Consolidated was that several little smaller entities were brought together.
Mr. Dr. Wilcox was instrumental in developing the school.
He was head of the education department at A&M, and his daughter, Joanna, was my classmate.
Do you have any idea about when the Indian Consolidated School started?